MATLAB scripts for the following study: 

Grid-like and distance codes for representing word meaning in the human brain

Viganò, Rubino, Di Soccio, Buiatti, Piazza

CIMeC, Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Italy

2021

journal name

doi

In the study we tested the hypothesis that two representational codes typically recruited by the human brain to represent relations between locations in space (the grid-like code (e.g., Doeller et al. 2010) and the distance code (e.g., Morgan et al. 2011)) are also recruited when we assess and compare the meaning of words in memory. We created a novel word set comprising 9 pseudowords (e.g., KER, GAL, MOS) referring to 9 novel audiovisual objects organized in a 3x3 structure, where size and pitch where orthogonally manipulated. Participants learned for 3 days the name of each object, and during an fMRI scanning session they were asked to compare the meaning of two subsequently presented names (e.g., KER --> MOS). We conceived this presentation as a movement in the underlying feature space of our concepts, and we applied MVPa and fMRI adaptation to look for signatures of both a grid-like and a distance code. Details on the study che be found at [DOI].

Two scripts are generated: grid_roi.m and grid_src.m
They both rely on the same method, grid-RSA, here explained:
In mammals, the representation of the relations between locations in the physical environment is captured by grid-cells (Bush et al. 2015), which tuning functions peak at multiple locations at the vertices of equilateral triangles tiling the entire navigable space (Hafting et al. 2005; Jacobs et al. 2013). Their presence can be inferred in humans using BOLD fMRI (Doeller et al. 2010). To test for grid-like modulation of the fMRI activity reflecting the relations between words in our experiment, we used a “grid Representational Similarity Analysis” (hereafter grid-RSA), inspired by Bellmund et al. 2016 and extensively described in Viganò and Piazza 2020, which logic is illustrated in Figure 2A in the paper ([DOI]). The first step of the grid-RSA is to run a GLM modeling the directions of movement between items of interest, that in our study are words. For details on the GLM procedure, refer to the paper. We obtained one beta for each movement direction for each run. Following the multivariate approach of Bellmund et al. 2016, we assumed that that preferred grid orientation varies, although minimally, across voxels, as empirically indicated by fMRI in humans (Doeller et al., 2010; Nau et al., 2018) and suggested by electrophysiological recording in rodents, showing that the grid orientation varies in a step-like fashion across different portions of the entorhinal cortex (Stensola et al., 2012). Previous studies showed this assumption to be plausible in both imagined physical (Bellmund et al. 2016) and conceptual (Bao et al. 2019; Viganò & Piazza 2020) spaces. Starting from this assumption, we hypothesized that within the 6-fold periodic space generated by a grid-like code two movement directions evoke a similar fMRI activity pattern if their angular distance is close to 60° or a multiple of it. Conversely, when two directions are not perfectly aligned in the 6-fold symmetry, the dissimilarity in the activity that they evoke is proportional to the difference between their angular distance and the closest multiple of 60° (hereafter referred to as “angular distance in the 60° rotational space”). We computed the 16x16 pairwise correlations between the brain activity evoked by word pairs corresponding to all the different 16 movement directions (averaged across runs) and correlated (Pearson’s r) this neural dissimilarity matrix (Fisher transformed) with the model of their angular distance in the 60° rotational space (represented in Figure 2B in the paper), as in traditional model-based Representational Similarity Analyses (Kriegeskorte et al. 2008). This procedure was first applied to the entorhinal ROIs (grid_roi.m), and next extended to the whole brain using a searchlight approach (sphere radius = 3 voxels; grid_src.m). As a control for the ROI analysis, this approach was repeated by assuming a 4-, 5-, 7-, and 8- fold periodicity (simply creating different models to correlate to the neural dissimilarity matrix). 

All the details are in the paper ([DOI]). If you use and/or adapt the scripts, please cite the original work: Viganò, Rubino, Di Soccio, Buiatti, Piazza (XXX) Grid-like and distance codes for representing word meaning in the human brain, XXX, XXX:XXX.

